hi guys so today i'm going to be doing
an article summary of an article by
piotr wozniak called pleasure of
learning
which i really consider to be an
essential read for any student educator
or just anyone with a stake
in the current or future state of the
education system
before i get started i want to let you
know that we're going to be doing a
voice chat
in the supermemory.wiki discord on this
sunday it will be on this article but
you don't actually have to read the
entire thing
just watching the summary alone would be
enough many people have found the
arguments that pyotan makes in this
article to be highly unintuitive and
the implications of his arguments to be
quite controversial
for that reason i imagine that there
will be a significant portion of the
audience of this presentation who will
disagree
strongly with some of the arguments
raised know for a fact
that pyote wozniak would echo the
sentiments of the greats jeffrey hinton
one of the fathers of deep learning
research
who in his turing award lecture said the
following
the future depends on some student who
is deeply skeptical of everything i've
said
if you disagree with any of the points
raised in this presentation i would
strongly urge you
to join the discussion on sunday we'd
love to have you there
one final point before we get started
there's actually a set of flashcards
available to accompany this presentation
anki and supermemo are both supported
and there are some pixel art images to
go along with them
they're available on github for free
that those seeking education may find it
so to begin with pleasure of learning is
a highly complex and challenging article
i really tried my best to distill the
core ideas into this presentation
it includes a large number of concepts
from a wide range of academic
disciplines including neuroscience
information theory evolution economics
just to name a few
that being said i would strongly
encourage any interested individual
to go and read the full article the core
idea of the article can be summed up
in pyotr wozniak's fundamental law of
learning that he introduces right at the
beginning of the article
the fundamental law of learning can be
summed up as good learning is inherently
pleasurable
and without pleasure there is no good
learning as i said in the beginning
this notion is highly unintuitive and i
suspect that you might be more familiar
with the idea that
learning is displeasurable for many
schools are a kind of
institutionalized misery students are
like widgets traveling down an assembly
line
having education forced upon them many
of them resort to cram and dump study
methods and as a result they leave
school
having learned hardly anything that they
were supposed to a similar situation
can be seen amongst users of space
repetition systems frequently users will
complain if the repetition grind
they feel like they've been transformed
into workers at a flash card factory
just mindlessly mashing
the space bar this culminates in the
glorification of the grinder's glory
mindset
in which people believe that displeasure
must be endured in order to learn
one common mistake that people make is
becoming like an aesthetic monk denying
oneself worldly pleasures
forcing oneself to endure displeasurable
learning in the hopes of a better
afterlife
by contrast wozniak insists that good
learning is pleasurable
and that our drive to learn is innate
fine-tuned over the course of human
evolution
he says that we have a built-in desire
to learn new things
that he terms the learn drive and that
learning and exploring are inherently
rewarding
in order to better understand wozniak's
argument let's take a look at the
process of knowledge valuation
how we value certain bits of information
knowledge valuation can be thought of as
a kind of
knowledge comparison information enters
the brain to be processed and undergoes
neural processing which is an
unconscious comparison between the new
information
and your prior knowledge and essentially
what your brain
is asking during the knowledge
comparison is is this new information
consistent with my model of reality is
it coherent and is it surprising
all of the answers to those questions
will affect the evaluation of that new
information
to sum all of that up what the brain is
asking is does this new piece of
information
slot into my model of reality
so to make everything a little bit more
concrete i'd like to show you an example
of me
reading the wikipedia article about tree
growth
oh interesting evolutionary adaptation i
definitely know a little bit about
evolution and i've certainly heard of
adaptations
they're able to compete better for
sunlight yeah just kind of match with
what i've seen in reality they do look
like they're competing with each other
among the oldest organisms they're
living wow that's surprising wow how
interesting
so imagine that this picture represents
my prior knowledge
reviews before reading the article for
example this part of the graph
could represent the episodic memories i
have of trees
this could be a particularly nice tree i
saw while on holiday
and this could be a tree that i remember
climbing up
and falling out of as a kid and breaking
my leg
then this part of the graph could be all
of the declarative
knowledge that i know about trees before
i read the article
basically what i'm trying to get at here
is that i already had a significant
amount of prior knowledge about trees
before i started reading the article
that meant that when i encountered new
information i was able to
easily slot it in to my models of
reality because it was consistent
coherent and some of it was also
surprising the essential point here that
wozniak is trying to make
is that learning consistent coherent or
surprising information
is all likely to get a response from the
reward centres in the brain
and this is the source of the pleasure
of learning
i'd like to quickly give you a second
concrete example
by reading an article about quantum
mechanics
at the scale of atoms and subatomic
particles
i've never heard of subatomic particles
before
quantum physics quantum chemistry
quantum field theory quantum technology
quantum
information science man i can't seem to
be able to
connect this to anything in my prior
knowledge the theory of what now
so in the case of quantum mechanics it
was clear that my prime knowledge was
lacking
and that a lot of the information i was
reading was inconsistent and
incoherent with my model of reality you
can think of there being a sort of
distance between my current model of
reality
and the model of reality that includes a
knowledge
of quantum mechanics i like to think of
the semantic distance
as the number of jigsaw puzzle pieces
that i need to slot in
to my jigsaw puzzle of reality in order
to understand
something like quantum mechanics one of
the downsides of learning inconsistent
or incoherent information
is that it causes a great deal of
displeasure for example your eyelids
feel heavy
you feel tired you feel irritated and
none of the information that you're
reading seems to
actually get assimilated into your brain
so this is really one of the
core points that wozniak wants to
emphasize in his article
in order to optimize for short semantic
distances to make our learning as
easy and as pleasurable as possible we
need to follow the line drive
so what does wozniak mean when he says
follow the line drive
well essentially what he means is that
we should learn freely we shouldn't
allow ourselves to be coerced for
example by following a
globally optimized curriculum instead we
should simply learn
what we enjoy since this is the most
optimal way
to learn and it is also the most
pleasurable way to learn people are
often surprised to hear that just
following the learn drive
is the optimal way to learn something
they're especially skeptical that
someone following the land drive could
ever become for example a great
mathematician or a great scientist
but there are many instances of systems
where the component parts
make simple locally optimized decisions
resulting in unpredictable emergent
phenomena
one example is with trees cells in a
tree
know very little about the global growth
goals of the tree
they just simply employ some hormonal
biochemical or biophysical rules
that guide the growth of the tree
towards light
similarly in market economies you have
agents making
very simple decisions to buy or sell
goods which leads to an exceptionally
complex network of global
supply chains for every kind of good and
service and there are many more
instances of these
kinds of systems in nature since the
process of knowledge valuation
must take place at the level of the
learner's own mind through a comparison
between new information
and the information already stored in
their memories the only optimal solution
to learning anything is free learning
learning what you enjoy based on your
own prior knowledge
finally i'd just like to quickly go back
over three of the most important golden
nuggets from this article
firstly the notion that learning should
be pleasurable
secondly pleasure is optimization and
finally
global optimization can never work in
learning we need to follow the learn
drive
so that's it for me today a reminder to
join the discussion in
supermemory.wiki discord on sunday if
you're interested
thanks for listening and send any
feedback you have to
at experia learning on twitter